Section: Section 8
Characters: 9907
==================================================
out it's a circuit design and chi
p design for inference time compute and it's so good at brainstorming with me an
d bringing back data and so long as the Wi-Fi on the plane is working. Time went
 by. (1:08:03) So my first experience with technology that went the other direct
ion but noticed that you also were not responding to texts and annoyances. You w
eren't reading ads. you were deep inside of a system which for which you paid a 
subscription. Mhm. (1:08:21) So if you look at the deep research stuff, one of t
he questions I have when you do a deep research analysis, I was looking at facto
ry automation for something. Where is the boundary of factory automation versus 
human automation? It's some an area I don't understand very well. It's very very
 deep technical set of problems. I didn't understand it. It took 20 12 minutes o
r so to generate this paper. 12 minutes of these supercomputers is an enormous a
mount of time. What is it doing? Right. (1:08:43) And the answer, of course, the
 product is fantastic. Yeah. You know, to Peter's question earlier, too, I keep 
the Google IPO perspectus in my bathroom up in Vermont. It's 2004. I've read it 
probably 500 times. But I don't know if you remember. It's getting a little ratt
y actually. You're the only the only person besides me who did the same. (1:09:0
2) I read it 500 times because I had to. It was. It was legally legally required
. Well, I still read it um because because of the misconceptions, it's just so i
t's such a great learning experience. But even before the IPO, if you think back
, you know, there's this big debate about will it be ad revenue, will it be subs
cription revenue, will it be paid inclusion, will the ads be visible, and all th
is confusion about how you're going to make money with this thing. (1:09:25) Now
, the internet moved to almost entirely ad revenue. But if you look at the AI mo
dels, they're, you know, you got your $20 now $200 subscription and people are s
igning up like crazy. So, you know, the it's ultra ultra convincing. Is that goi
ng to be a form of ad revenue where it convinces you to buy something or no? Is 
it going to be subscription revenue where people pay a lot more and there's no a
dvertising at all? No, but you have you have this with Netflix. There was this w
hole discussion about would would how would you fund (1:09:52) movies through ad
s? And the answer is you don't. You have a subscription. And the Netflix p peopl
e looked at having free movies without a subscription and advertising supported 
and the math didn't work. So I think both will be tried. (1:10:13) I think the f
act of the matter is deep research at least at the moment is going to be chosen 
by wellto-do or professional tasks. You are capable of spending that $200 a mont
h. A lot of people don't afford cannot afford it. And that free service remember
 is the thing that is the stepping stone for that young person man or woman who 
just needs that access. My favorite story there is that when I when I was at Goo
gle and I went to Kenya and Kenya is a great country and I and I was with this c
omputer science professor and he said, "I love Google." I said, "Well, I love Go
ogle, too." And he goes, "Well, I really love Google." I said, "I really love Go
ogle, too." And I said, "Why do (1:10:43) you really love Google?" He said, "Bec
ause we don't have textbooks." And I thought, "The top computer science program 
in the nation does not have textbooks." Yeah. Well, let me uh let me jump in a c
ouple things here. Uh Eric in in the next few years what moes actually exist for
 startups as AI is coming in and disrupting uh do you have a list? Yes, I I'll g
ive you a simple answer. (1:11:14) And what do you look for in the companies tha
t you're investing in? So first in the deep tech hardware stuff there's going to
 be patents, patents, filings, inventions, you know the hard stuff. Those things
 are much slower than the software industry in terms of growth and they're just 
as important. You know, power systems, all those robotic systems we've been wait
ing for a long time. (1:11:34) They're just it's just slower for all sorts of ha
rdware is hard. Hardware is hard for those reasons. In software, it's pretty cle
ar to me it's going to be really simple. These software is typically a network e
ffect business where the fastest mover wins. The fastest mover is the fastest le
arner in an AI system. So what I look for is a is a a company where they have a 
loop. (1:12:00) Ideally, they have a couple of learning loops. So I'll give you 
a simple learning loop that as you get more people, the more people click and yo
u learn from their click. They they they express their preferences. So let's say
 I invent a whole new consumer thing, which I don't have an idea right now for i
t, but imagine I did. (1:12:18) And furthermore, I said that I don't know anythi
ng about how consumers behave, but I'm going to launch this thing. The moment pe
ople start using it, I'm going to learn from them, and I'll have instantaneous l
earning to get smarter about what they want. So, I start from nothing. If my lea
rning slope is this, I'm essentially unstoppable. (1:12:38) I'm unstoppable beca
use I'm my learning advantage by the time my competitor figures out what I've do
ne is too great. Yeah. Now, how close can my my competitor be and still lose? Th
e answer is a few months. Mhm. Because the slopes are exponential. Mhm. And so, 
it's likely to me that there will be another 10 fantastic Google scale meta-cale
 companies. They'll all be founded on this principle of learning loops. (1:13:04
) And when I say learning loops, I mean in the core product, solving the current
 problem as fast you can. If you cannot define the learning loop, you're going t
o be beaten by a company that can define it. And you said 10 meta Googlesized co
mpanies. (1:13:23) Do you think they'll there will also be a thousand like if yo
u look at the enterprise software business the you know Oracle on down peopleoft
 whatever thousands of those or will they all consolidate into those 10 that are
 domain dominant learning loop companies? Um, I think I'm largely speaking about
 consumer scale because that's where the real growth is. The problem with learni
ng loops is if your customer is not ready for you, you can only learn at a certa
in rate. (1:13:50) So, it's probably the case that the government is not interes
ted in learning and therefore there's no growth in learning loop serving the gov
ernment. I'm sorry to say that needs to get fixed. Yeah. Um, educational systems
 are largely regulated and run by the unions and so forth. they're not intereste
d in innovation. They're not going to be doing any learning. I'm sorry to say we
 have to get that has to get fixed. (1:14:08) So the ones where there's a very f
ast feedback signal are the ones to watch. Another example, uh it's pretty obvio
us that you can build a whole new stock trading company where you learn if you g
et the algorithms right, you learn faster than everyone else and scale matters. 
So in the presence of scale and fast learning loops, that's the moat. (1:14:28) 
Now I don't know that there's many others there. You do have you think brand wou
ld be a mode? Uh brand matters but less so. What's interesting is people seem to
 be perfectly willing now to move from one thing to the other in at least in the
 digital world. And there's a whole new set of brands that have emerged that eve
ryone is using that are you know the next generations that I haven't even heard 
of. (1:14:51) With within those learning loops you think domain specific synthet
ic data is a is a big advantage? Well, the answer is whatever it causes faster l
earning. There are applications where you have enough training data from humans.
 There are applications where you have to generate the training data from what t
he humans are doing. (1:15:12) Right? So, you could imagine a situation where yo
u had a learning loop where there's no humans involved where it's monitoring som
ething, some sensors, but because you learn faster on those sensors, you get so 
smart, you can't be replaced by another sensor management company. That's the wa
y to think about. (1:15:30) So, so what about the the capital for the learning l
oop? Like because um do you know Danielle Roose who runs CE? So Danielle and I a
re really good friends. We've been talking to our governor Mora Healey who's one
of the best governors in the world. I agree. So there's a problem in our academ
ic systems where the big companies have all the hardware because they have all t
he money and the universities do not have the money for even reasonablesiz data 
centers. (1:15:56) I was with one university where after lot lots of meetings th
ey agreed to spend $50 million on a data center which generates less than a thou
sand GPUs right for the entire campus and all the research. Yeah. And that doesn
't even include the terabytes of storage and so forth. So I and others are worki
ng on this as a philanthropic matter. The government is going to have to come in
 with more money for universities for this kind of stuff. (1:16:15) That is amon
g the best investment. When I was young, I was on a National Science Foundation 
scholarship for and by the way, I made $15,000 a year. Uh the return to the nati
on of my that $15,000 has been very good, shall we say, based on the taxes that 
I pay and the jobs that we have created. So core question. (1:16:38) So glad you
 so so creating so creating an ecosystem for the next generation to have the acc
ess to the systems is important. It's not obvious to me that they need billions 
of dollars. It's pretty obvious to me that they need a million dollars, $2 milli
on. Yeah, that's the goal. Yeah. I want to I want to take a I want to take us in
 a direction of uh of uh wrapping up on super intelligence and the book.