Section: Section 7
Characters: 9956
==================================================
, it's very expensive to do long-term video, although that will come down. And also there's an occasional extra leg or extra clock or whatever. It's not perfect yet. And that requires human editing. (58:50) So even in the scenario where a lot of the the video is created by by a computer, there going to be humans that are producing it and directing it for reasons. My best example in Hollywood is that let's let's use the example and I was at at a studio where they were showing me this. They had they happened to have an actor who was recreating William Sha Shatner's movies uh movements a young man and they had licensed the likeness from you know William Shatner who's now older and they put his head on this person's body and it was seamless. Well that's pretty impressive. That's more revenue for (59:22) everyone. The an unknown actor becomes a bit more famous, Mr. Shatner gets more revenue, they the whole the whole movie genre works. That's a good thing. Another example is that nowadays they use green screens rather than sets. (59:42) And furthermore, in the alien department, when you have, you know, scary movies, instead of having the makeup person, they just add the makeup digitally. So, who wins? The costs are lower. the movies are made quicker. In theory, the movies are better, right? Because you have more choices. Um, so everybody wins. Who loses? Well, there was somebody who built that set and that set isn't needed anymore. (1:00:03) That's a carpenter and a very talented person who now has to go get a job in the carpentry business. So again, I think people get confused. If I look at at if I look at the digital transformation of entertainment subject to intellectual property being held, which is always a question, it's going to be just fine, right? There's still going to be blockbusters. (1:00:28) The cost will go down, not up, or the or the relative income because in Hollywood, they essentially have their own accounting and they essentially allocate all the revenue to all the key producing people. The the allocation will shift to the people who are the most creative. That's a normal process. (1:00:47) Remember we said earlier that automation gets rid of the poor the lowest quality jobs, the most dangerous jobs there. The jobs that are sort of straightforward are probably automated, but they're really creative jobs. Um, another example, the script writers. You're still going to have script writers, but they're going to have an awful lot of help from AI to write even better scripts. That's not bad. Okay. (1:01:10) I saw a study recently out of Stanford that documented AI being much more persuasive than the best humans. Yes. Uh that set off some alarms. It also set off some interesting thoughts on the future of advertising. Any particular thoughts about that? So we know the following. We know that if the system knows you well enough, it can learn to convince you of anything. Mhm. (1:01:35) So what that means in an unregulated environment is that the systems will know you better and better. They'll get better at pitching you and if you're not savvy, if you're not smart, you could be easily manipulated. We also know that the computer is better than humans trying to do the same thing. So none of this surprises me. (1:01:55) The real question and I'll ask this in as a question is in the presence of unregulated misinformation engines of which there will be many advertisers, uh politicians, just criminal people people trying to evade responsibility. There's all sorts of people who have free speech. When they have free speech which includes the ability to use misinformation to their advantage, what happens to democracy? Yeah, we we've all grown up in democracies where there's a sort of a a consensus around trust and there's an elite that more or less administers the trust vectors and so forth. There's a set of shared values. Do those shared values go (1:02:34) away? In our book about Genesis, we talk about this as a deeper problem. What does it mean to be human when you're interacting mostly with these digital things, especially if the digital things have their own scenarios? My favorite example is that uh you have a son or a grandson or a child or a grandchild and you give them a bear and the bear has a personality and the child grows up but the bear grows up too. (1:03:01) So who regulates what the bear talks to the kid? Most people haven't actually experienced the super super empathetic voice that can be any inflection you want. When they see that which will be in the next probably two months. Yeah. they're going to completely open their eyes to what this Well, remember that voice casting was solved a few years ago and that you can cast anyone else's voice onto your own. Yeah. And that has all sorts of problems. (1:03:25) Have you seen uh an avatar yet of somebody that you love that's passed away or or Henry Kissinger or anything is that? Well, we created we actually created one with the permission of his family. Did you start crying instantly? Uh it's very emotional. It's very emotional because, you know, it brings back I mean it's it's a real human, you know, it's a real memory, a real voice. Um, and I think we're going to see more of that. (1:03:50) Now, one obvious thing that will happen is at some point in the future when when we naturally die, our digital essence will live in the cloud. Yeah. And it will know what we knew at the time and you can ask it a question. Yeah. So, can you imagine asking Einstein, going back to Einstein, what did you really think about, you know, this other guy, you know, did you actually like him or were you just being polite with him with letters? Yeah. Right. (1:04:14) Um, and in all those sort of famous contests that we study as students, can you imagine be able to ask the, you know, the people Yeah. Today, you know, with today's retrospective, what did you really think? I know that the education example you gave earlier is so much more compelling when you're talking to Isaac Newton or Albert Einstein instead of just a but you know it's so it's so this is coming back to the V3 in the movies when the one of the first companies we incubated out of MIT course advisor we sold it to Don Graham and the Washington Post and then so I was (1:04:45) working for him for a year after that and the conception was here's the internet here's the newspaper let's move the newspaper onto the internet we'll call it washingtonost.com and if you look hit where it ended up, you know, today with Meta, Tik Tok, YouTube didn't end up anything like the newspaper moves to the internet. So now here's V3, here are movies. (1:05:07) You can definitely make a long form movie much more cheaply. But I just had this experience of somebody that I know is a complete this director will try and make a tearjerker by leading me down a two-hour long path. But I can get you to that same emotional state in about five minutes if it's personalized to you. (1:05:24) Well, one of the things that's happened because of the addictive nature of the internet is we've lost um sort of the deep state of reading. Mhm. So, I was walking around and I saw a Borders, sorry, a Barnes & Noble bookstore. Big, oh my god, my old home is back and I went in and I felt good. But it's a very fond memory. But the fact of the matter is that people's attention spans are shorter. (1:05:48) They consume things quicker. One of the things interesting about sports is the sports highlights business is a huge business. Licensed clips around highlights because it's more efficient than watching the whole game. So, I suspect that if you're with your buddies and you want to have be drinking and so forth, you put the game on, that's fine. (1:06:07) But if you're a busy person and you're busy with whatever you're busy of and you want to know what happened with your favorite team, the highlights are good enough. Yeah. You have four panes of it going at the same time, too. And so, this is again a change and it's it's a more fundamental change to attention. Mhm. I've been w or k I work with a lot of 20somes in research and one of the questions I had is how do they do research in the presence of all of these stimulations and I can answer the question definitively. They turn off (1:06:33) their phone. Yeah. You can't think deeply as a researcher with this thing buzzing. And remember that that part of the the industry's goal was to fully monetize your attention. Yeah. Ri ght. We we essent aside from sleeping and we're working on having you have less sleep I I guess from stress we've essentially tried to monetize all of your waki ng hours with something some form of ads some form of entertainment some form of subscription that is completely antithetical to the way humans traditionally wo rk with respect (1:07:06) to long thoughtful examination of principles the time that it takes to be a good human being these are in conflict right now there are various attempts at this. So, you know, my favorite are these digital apps that make you relax. Okay. (1:07:25) So, the correct thing to do to relax is to turn off your phone, right? And then relax in a traditional way for, you know, 70,0000 human years of existence. Yeah. Yeah. I had an incredible experience. I'm doin g the flight from MIT to Stanford all the time. And, you know, like you said, attention spans are getting shorter and shorter and shorter. The Tik Tok extreme, you know, the clips are so short. (1:07:45) This particular flight was my first time brainstorming with Gemini for six hours straight and I completely lost trac k of time and I was we're I'm trying to figure out it's a circuit design and chip design for inference time compute and it's so good at brainstorming with me an d bringing back data and so long as the Wi-Fi on the plane is working. Time went by.