Section: Section 9
Characters: 8247
==================================================
me that they need a million dollars, $2 milli
on. Yeah, that's the goal. Yeah. I want to I want to take a I want to take us in
 a direction of uh of uh wrapping up on super intelligence and the book. (1:17:0
2) Um, we didn't finish the timeline on super intelligence and I think it's impo
rtant to give people a sense of how quickly the self-reerential learning can get
 and how rapidly we can get to something, you know, a thousand times, a million,
 a billion times more capable than a human. On the flip side of that, Eric, when
 I look at my greatest concerns when we get through this 5 to sevenyear period o
f uh let's just say rogue actors and stabilization and such. (1:17:39) Uh one of
 the biggest concerns I have is the diminishment of human purpose. Mhm. Um, you 
know, you wrote uh in the book uh and I've listened to it uh haven't read it phy
sically and my kids say you don't read anymore. You you listen to books you don'
t read. But um you said the real risk is not terminator, it's drift. Um you argu
e that AI won't destroy human uh humanity violently, but might slowly erode huma
n values, autonomy, and judgment if left unregulated, misunderstood. (1:18:12) S
o it's really a Wall-E like future versus a a Star Trek boldly go out there. We'
re very in the book and my own personal view is it's very important that human a
gency be protected. Yeah. Human agency means the ability to get up in the day an
d do what you want subject to the law. Right. (1:18:34) And it's perfectly possi
ble that these digital devices can create a form of a virtual prison where you d
on't feel that you as a human can do what you want. Right? That is to be avoided
. I I'm I'm not worried about that case. I'm more worried about the case that if
 you want to do something, it's just so much easier to ask your robot or your AI
 to do it for you. (1:18:57) The the human spirit that wants to overcome a chall
enge. I mean the unchallenged life is so going to so critical but but there will
 be always new challenges. Uh when I was a boy uh one of the things that I did i
s I would repair my father's car right I don't do that anymore. When I was a boy
 I used to mow the lawn. I don't do that anymore. Sure. Right. So there are plen
ty of examples of things that we used to do that we don't need to do anymore. (1
:19:20) But there'll be plenty of things. Just remember the complexity of the wo
rld that I'm describing is not a simple world. Just managing the world around yo
u is going to be a full-time and purposeful job. Partly because there will be so
 many people fighting for misinformation and for your attention and and there's 
obviously lots of competition and so forth. There's lots of things to worry abou
t. (1:19:44) Plus, you have all of the people, you know, trying to get your tryi
ng to get your your money, create opportunities, deceive you, what have you. So,
 I think human purpose will remain because humans need purpose. That's the point
. And you know there's lots of literature that the people who have what we would
 consider to be lowpaying worthless jobs enjoy going to work. So the challenge i
s not to get rid of their job. It's to make their job more productive using AI t
ools. (1:20:09) They're still going to go to work. And I to be very clear this n
otion that we're all going to be sitting around doing poetry is not happening. R
ight? In the future there'll be lawyers. They'll use tools to have even more com
plex lawsuits against each other, right? There will be evil people who will use 
these tools to create even more evil problems. (1:20:31) There will be good peop
le who will be trying to deter the evil people. The tools change, but the struct
ure of humanity, the way we work together is not going to change. Peter and I we
re on Mike Sailor's yacht a couple months ago, and I was complaining that the cu
rriculum is completely broken in all these schools. But what I meant was we shou
ld be teaching AI. (1:20:50) And he said, "Yeah, they should be teaching aesthet
ics." And I looked at him, I'm like, "What the hell are you talking about?" He s
aid, "No, in the age of AI, which is imminent, look at everything around you, wh
ether it's good or bad, enjoyable, not enjoyable, it's all about designing aesth
etics. (1:21:08) " When the AI is such a force multiplier that you can create vi
rtually anything, what what are you creating and why? And that becomes the chall
enge. If you look at Vickinstein and the sort of theories of all of this stuff, 
it is all fundament we're having a conversation that America has about tasks and
 outcomes. It's our culture. But there are other aspects of human life, meaning,
 thinking, reasoning. (1:21:28) We're not going to stop doing that. So imagine i
f your purpose in life in the future is to figure out what's going on and to be 
successful, just figuring that out is sufficient. Because once you figured it ou
t, it's taken care of for you. That's beautiful, right? That provides purpose. Y
eah. (1:21:46) Um it's pretty clear that robots will take over an awful lot of m
echanical or manual work. Um and for people who like to, you know, I like to rep
air the car. I don't do it anymore. I miss it, but I I have other things to do w
ith my time. Yeah. Take me forward. When do you see uh what you define as digita
l super intelligence? Uh within 10 years. Within 10 years. (1:22:09) And what do
 people need to know about that? What do people need to understand and sort of u
h prepare themselves for either from as a parent or as a employee or as a CEO? O
ne way to think about it is that when digital super intelligence finally arrives
 and is generally available and generally safe, you're going to have your own po
lymath. (1:22:36) So you're going to have the sum of Einstein and Leonardo da Vi
nci in the equivalent of your pocket. I think thinking about how you would use t
hat gift is interesting. And of course evil people will become more evil, but th
e vast majority of people are good. Yes, they're well-meaning, right? So going b
ack to your abundance argument, there are people who've studied the the n the no
tion of productivity increases and they believe that you can get we'll see to 30
% year-over-year economic growth through abundance and so forth. That's a very w
ealthy world. That's a world of (1:23:12) much less disease, many more choices, 
much more fun if you will, right? Just taking all those poor people and lifting 
them out of the daily struggle they have. That is a great human goal. That's foc
us on that. That's the goal we should have. Does GDP still have meaning in that 
world? If you include services, it does. (1:23:32) Um, one of the things about m
anufacturing and and everyone's focused on trade deficits and they don't underst
and the vast majority of modern economies are service economies, not manufacturi
ng economies. And if you look at the percentage of farming, it was roughly 98% t
o roughly 2 or 3% in America over a hundred years. (1:23:51) If you look at manu
facturing, the heydays in the 30s and 40s and 50s, those percentages are now dow
n. Well, lower than 10%. It's not because we don't buy stuff. It's because the s
tuff is automat automated. You need fewer people. Those there's plenty of people
 working in other jobs. So again, look at the totality of the society. Is it hea
lthy? If you look in China, it's easy to complain about them. (1:24:15) Um they 
have now deflation. They have a term where people are it's called laying down wh
ere they lay they they stay at home. They don't participate in the workforce, wh
ich is counter to their traditional culture. If you look at reproduction rates, 
these countries that are essentially having no children, that's not a good thing
. Yeah. Right. (1:24:33) Those are problems that we're going to face. Those are 
the new problems of the age. I love that. Eric, uh, so grateful for your time. T
hank you. Thank you both. Um, I I love your show. Yeah. Thank you, buddy. Thank 
you. Okay. Thank you, guys. If you could have had a 10-year head start on the do
t boom back in the 2000s, would you have taken it? Every week, I track the major
 tech meta trends. These are massive game-changing shifts that will play out ove
r the decade ahead.