Section: Section 6
Characters: 9924
==================================================
ve seen is that teachers assign AI-generated essays for
students to find and correct mistakes.
While many education companies embrace AI to build better products, many find
their lunches taken by AI. For example, Chegg, a company that helps students with
their homework, saw its share price plummet from $28 when ChatGPT launched in
November 2022 to $2 in September 2024, as students have been turning to AI for
help.
If the risk is that AI can replace many skills, the opportunity is that AI can be used as
a tutor to learn any skill. For many skills, AI can help someone get up to speed
quickly and then continue learning on their own to become better than AI.
Foundation Model Use Cases
It surprises me how long it takes Apple and Amazon to incorporate generative AI advances into Siri and
Alexa. A friend thinks it s because these companies might have higher bars for quality and compliance, and it
takes longer to develop voice interfaces than chat interfaces.
Disclaimer: I m an advisor of Convai.
Conversational Bots
Conversational bots are versatile. They can help us find information, explain con!
cepts, and brainstorm ideas. AI can be your companion and therapist. It can emulate
personalities, letting you talk to a digital copy of anyone you like. Digital girlfriends
and boyfriends have become weirdly popular in an incredibly short amount of time.
Many are already spending more time talking to bots than to humans (see the discus!
sions here and here). Some are worried that AI will ruin dating.
In research, people have also found that they can use a group of conversational bots
to simulate a society, enabling them to conduct studies on social dynamics (Park et
al., 2023).
For enterprises, the most popular bots are customer support bots. They can help
companies save costs while improving customer experience because they can respond
to users sooner than human agents. AI can also be product copilots that guide cus!
tomers through painful and confusing tasks such as filing insurance claims, doing
taxes, or looking up corporate policies.
The success of ChatGPT prompted a wave of text-based conversational bots. How!
ever, text isn’t the only interface for conversational agents. Voice assistants such as
Google Assistant, Siri, and Alexa have been around for years.15 3D conversational
bots are already common in games and gaining traction in retail and marketing.
One use case of AI-powered 3D characters is smart NPCs, non-player characters (see
NVIDIA s demos of Inworld and Convai).16 NPCs are essential for advancing the
storyline of many games. Without AI, NPCs are typically scripted to do simple
actions with a limited range of dialogues. AI can make these NPCs much smarter.
Intelligent bots can change the dynamics of existing games like The Sims and Skyrim
as well as enable new games never possible before.
Information Aggregation
Many people believe that our success depends on our ability to filter and digest useful
information. However, keeping up with emails, Slack messages, and news can some!
times be overwhelming. Luckily, AI came to the rescue. AI has proven to be capable
of aggregating information and summarizing it. According to Salesforce s
Generative AI Snapshot Research, 74% of generative AI users use it to distill complex
ideas and summarize information.
Chapter 1: Introduction to Building AI Applications with Foundation Models
I currently have over 40,000 photos and videos in my Google Photos. Without AI, it d be near impossible for
me to search for the photos I want, when I want them.
For consumers, many applications can process your documents—contracts, disclo!
sures, papers—and let you retrieve information in a conversational manner. This use
case is also called talk-to-your-docs. AI can help you summarize websites, research,
and create reports on the topics of your choice. During the process of writing this
book, I found AI helpful for summarizing and comparing papers.
Information aggregation and distillation are essential for enterprise operations. More
efficient information aggregation and dissimilation can help an organization become
leaner, as it reduces the burden on middle management. When Instacart launched an
internal prompt marketplace, it discovered that one of the most popular prompt tem!
plates is Fast Breakdown. This template asks AI to summarize meeting notes,
emails, and Slack conversations with facts, open questions, and action items. These
action items can then be automatically inserted into a project tracking tool and
assigned to the right owners.
AI can help you surface the critical information about your potential customers and
run analyses on your competitors.
The more information you gather, the more important it is to organize it. Informa!
tion aggregation goes hand in hand with data organization.
Data Organization
One thing certain about the future is that we ll continue producing more and more
data. Smartphone users will continue taking photos and videos. Companies will con!
tinue to log everything about their products, employees, and customers. Billions of
contracts are being created each year. Photos, videos, logs, and PDFs are all unstruc!
tured or semistructured data. It s essential to organize all this data in a way that can
be searched later.
AI can help with exactly that. AI can automatically generate text descriptions about
images and videos, or help match text queries with visuals that match those queries.
Services like Google Photos are already using AI to surface images that match search
queries.17 Google Image Search goes a step further: if there s no existing image match!
ing users needs, it can generate some.
Foundation Model Use Cases
Personally, I also find AI good at explaining data and graphs. When encountering a confusing graph with too
much information, I ask ChatGPT to break it down for me.
AI is very good with data analysis. It can write programs to generate data visualiza!
tion, identify outliers, and make predictions like revenue forecasts.18
Enterprises can use AI to extract structured information from unstructured data,
which can be used to organize data and help search it. Simple use cases include auto!
matically extracting information from credit cards, driver s licenses, receipts, tickets,
contact information from email footers, and so on. More complex use cases include
extracting data from contracts, reports, charts, and more. It s estimated that the IDP,
intelligent data processing, industry will reach $12.81 billion by 2030, growing 32.9%
each year.
Workflow Automation
Ultimately, AI should automate as much as possible. For end users, automation can
help with boring daily tasks like booking restaurants, requesting refunds, planning
trips, and filling out forms.
For enterprises, AI can automate repetitive tasks such as lead management, invoicing,
reimbursements, managing customer requests, data entry, and so on. One especially
exciting use case is using AI models to synthesize data, which can then be used to
improve the models themselves. You can use AI to create labels for your data, loop!
ing in humans to improve the labels. We discuss data synthesis in Chapter 8.
Access to external tools is required to accomplish many tasks. To book a restaurant,
an application might need permission to open a search engine to look up the restau!
rant s number, use your phone to make calls, and add appointments to your calendar.
AIs that can plan and use tools are called agents. The level of interest around agents
borders on obsession, but it s not entirely unwarranted. AI agents have the potential
to make every person vastly more productive and generate vastly more economic
value. Agents are a central topic in Chapter 6.
It s been a lot of fun looking into different AI applications. One of my favorite things
to daydream about is the different applications I can build. However, not all applica!
tions should be built. The next section discusses what we should consider before
building an AI application.
Planning AI Applications
Given the seemingly limitless potential of AI, it s tempting to jump into building
applications. If you just want to learn and have fun, jump right in. Building is one of
the best ways to learn. In the early days of foundation models, several heads of AI
Chapter 1: Introduction to Building AI Applications with Foundation Models
Smaller startups, however, might have to prioritize product focus and can t afford to have even one person to
look around.
told me that they encouraged their teams to experiment with AI applications to
upskill themselves.
However, if you re doing this for a living, it might be worthwhile to take a step back
and consider why you re building this and how you should go about it. It s easy to
build a cool demo with foundation models. It s hard to create a profitable product.
Use Case Evaluation
The first question to ask is why you want to build this application. Like many busi!
ness decisions, building an AI application is often a response to risks and opportuni!
ties. Here are a few examples of different levels of risks, ordered from high to low:
1. If you don t do this, competitors with AI can make you obsolete. If AI poses a
major existential threat to your business, incorporating AI must have the highest
priority. In the 2023 Gartner study, 7% cited business continuity as their reason
for embracing AI. This is more common for businesses involving document pro!
cessing and information aggregation, such as financial analysis, insurance, and
data processing. This is also common for creative work such as advertising, web
design, and image production. You can refer to the 2023 OpenAI study, GPTs
are GPTs , to see how industries rank in their exposure to
AI.
2. If you don t do this, you ll miss opportunities to boost profits and productivity.
Most companies embrace AI for the opportunities it brings. AI can help in most,
if not all, business operations.